Once around, Alberio, one of the
prettiest stars to look at through a
telescope in the night sky. It's located
in the constellation of Signis. It's
actually the beak of Signis, the Swan,
and it's designated Beta. The second
brightest star should be designated
Beta. And this isn't because the Gamma
and Delta stars are certainly brighter
than it. So I'm not quite sure why it
managed to pick up the beta designation.
It's only a magnitude three star. Fairly
modest actually, especially by
comparison to alpha signi denb, which is
very bright indeed. Um, and we say that
this is about 400 light years away from
us, but we'll look at that in more
detail. But first, here's a view that
you get through a
telescope. It's an amazing color
contrast double star. What you see as a
single star turns out to be two even
with a modest telescope or a pair of
binoculars because the angular
separation between the two components is
about 35
arcseconds. Really wide
indeed. And what's most striking is the
color. One of them is orange and the
other one is blue. And the contrast
between those is just
amazing. The uh orange star is the
brighter of the pair. And that always
puzzled me for a while because I always
thought blue stars were powerful and hot
and brighter. Um, but we'll see why that
is also as we go further into this
subject. But first of all, the question
really is, is it a true double star or
are these simply orbiting separately
around the galaxy and just happen to be
in the correct line of
sight? Well, first of all, with them
being 400 light years away and at the
distance that uh that corresponds to in
terms of the angular separation, the
orbit would be at least a 100,000 years
in duration. And that's really rather
difficult over human time scales to be
able to notice. So, it could just be a
coincidence. It could be a line of sight
pro problem. We have that here. This is
the Hiades cluster in Taurus. And the
blue and white stars that you can see
there making up that Vshape, the shape
that corresponds to the face of Taurus
the bull are part of the Hiadees star
cluster about 600 light years away.
Whereas the bright white with a slight
hint of orange tinge to it star, that's
older Baron. Not part of the cluster at
all. It's in the foreground. It's only
46 light years away. So over 10 times
nearer. So these line of sight things
are quite difficult to interpret
sometimes. So what we have to do is use
methods to measure the distance. In
particular the idea of parallax and we
can do that I mean from the ground but
we can also do it with satellites. And
the Hippacos satellite was dedicated to
the task and told us that the A star was
434 plus or minus 20 light years away
and the B star a little bit nearer 401
plus or
-3. So somewhat different and therefore
perhaps just a line of sight
effect. Um more recently the Gaia
satellites had a go and tends to produce
better answers. Some of the answers from
Hipparacos were not entirely
reliable, but Gia has had a problem with
this one as well. And the figures that
we have suggest somewhere between 330
and 390 light years, a bit lower than
Hipparos. And that's actually fairly
common. Hipparos seem to slightly
overestimate things. But uh that
widespread of 60 light years really
doesn't help us try and identify whether
the distances are different or not. So
what do we know about the individual
stars?
Well, Alberio A, the orange star is a K
type
4,383 degrees Kelvin, but it's 60 times
the diameter of the sun. So this is a
giant star. And in fact, it's uh over
five times the sun's mass. This means
that it's a bright
giant. It started life on the main
sequence converting hydrogen to helium
in the core by nuclear fusion. When the
core became
depleted and it had to uh move the
hydrogen fusion out into a shell over an
inert helium core. It became a red giant
for a while, but eventually that core
got hot enough and dense enough that it
was able to trigger helium to carbon
fusion and become a more efficient,
hotter overall powerhouse again. And so
that's the phase that it's in now,
becoming rather brighter than a typical
red giant. And we estimate the age to be
around a 100 million years. Again, we'll
have a uh come back to that in a moment.
That's
important. Now, Alberio A also seems to
have some companions. And the first
attempt at proving that it was a double
star came from the fact that the
spectrum of light seemed to show
evidence that it was moving backwards
and forwards, changing its radial
velocity, and therefore probably in
orbit around a nearby companion. And I
don't mean Alberio B. I mean something
much
closer. And these observations were made
back in the 19th century through to the
early part of the 20th century when it
was listed in the Henry Draper catalog
um with two separate uh catalog numbers
183 912 and
913 for the AAR and its little companion
as yet unseen but detected nevertheless.
And in 1978, the technique of speckle
interferometry was being developed and
used and claimed to have resolved a
separate companion. This Alberio AB just
0.125 arcseconds from the primary. No
wonder it couldn't be spotted by
ordinary techniques. But I'm afraid
there's still doubt about whether or not
these detections were real.
What we have been able to show is that
there is Alberio
AC with an orbit of a couple of hundred
years going around the primary. And this
is a
2.7 solar mass star, three times the
diameter on the main sequence, burning
away brightly at 10,000 Kelvin. Uh so
quite a a powerful star in its own
right.
There's even evidence that there's an AD
component which is a small red dwarf,
very small indeed, 8.5% of the mass of
the sun is about as small as a proper
star can be in an orbit going around in
just 371 days. So much closer than
Alberio
AC. Now if we look at Alberio B, the one
we can easily see, the blue one, this is
also quite a big star. 3.7 times the
mass of the sun, 2.6 times the diameter,
and very hot, 13,200 Kelvin on the
surface, and spinning very rapidly. So
rapidly, in fact, that we classify this
as a be type star. And that tends to go
with the fact that it has a detached
shell of gas possibly because that
incredible speed of rotation is throwing
material off at the equator as shown in
the illustration there. Um, and there's
some evidence that this as well is a
double star, but that's not been proven
yet either. So that would be Alberio BB
if it was proven.
Well, trying to know whether or not the
distance of Alberio B is the same as
Alberio A hasn't really worked for us in
terms of proving if the two are actually
in orbit. So, what other clues might
might we look at? Well, if we look at
the evolutionary track on the Herzbrung
Russell diagram, which would show where
stars would be on the main sequence on
that diagonal line down the middle, a
five solar mass star would be uh roughly
slightly above center there where it
says the Q of sequence. In fact, that
would be about five solar masses. And
then two solar masses. Well, that's
about where Sirius is. And then you can
see the sun marked a little bit lower
down there. So these are the sort of
positions that those masses of 5.2, 3.7
and 2.7 for the properly identified
stars are
concerned. But with those masses they
will evolve along their evolutionary
tracks at different rates. The most
massive stars will evolve most quickly
because lives uh giant stars, big stars,
massive stars live fast and die young.
They burn their fuel. Even though they
have more fuel, they burn it so
prodigiously that their lifetimes are
shorter. And you can see the lifetimes
illustrated along in green on the
diagram
there. And so if we look at the actual
tracks that we think these stars have
taken, and I've overlaid that here, it's
a little hard to read, but the top
squiggly line, that's the
uh A star, starting at about 5.2 solar
masses, it will have evolved off the
main sequence and moved over up into the
tip of the red giant star group and then
downwards and become brighter again. uh
as it uh moves into this bright giant
phase through the helium fusion kicking
off in the core. The B star, the middle
squiggly line, is just beginning to
evolve off the main sequence. Hasn't
really headed off over up to the top
right into the giant branch at all. And
the A C star at just uh two and a bit
solar masses, that's still firmly on the
main sequence. turning hydrogen to
helium in its core. Um, if we look at
the the consequences of that, it means
it's consistent with all three of them
having an age of about 100 million
years. A 5.2 two solar mass star of age
100 million years would be expected to
have ceased hydrogen fusion in the core
long ago headed off up become a giant
star and then kicked off helium fusion
just as we've
observed the middleweight star well that
would just be on the cusp of running out
of hydrogen in the core at 100 million
years and the lesser one would be still
B burning away merrily as a white star.
So it looks like they were all born
together at the same time. And that
means it probably is a triple star
system or even a multiple star system if
some of the others turn out to be true.
Speaking of which, we have found about
10 more companion stars in the line of
sight. Now, some are probably just
optical line of sight effect stars, but
some do seem to be at the right distance
and moving in the right direction with
the same radial velocity approximately
towards us in fact. So, the whole group
is coming towards the solar system.
And this suggests that this is the
remains of a 100 millionyear-old star
cluster in fact and that all of these
were born together. So it seems to have
solved the uh origin and the evolution
of all of these fascinating stars of the
Alberio co-moving group. And as I said
they are coming towards us. We can tell
from their overall Doppler shift and the
radial velocity measurements that
they're heading our way. It's not going
to be a collision, but in the future,
the Alberio star system will become the
brightest star in the sky. You just have
to wait about 4 million years for that
to happen. So, sadly, we won't see
it. Anyway, I'll just leave you here
with this very, very lovely image of
Alberio against the night sky. If you
get the chance to look at it through a
telescope, please do. It's absolutely
gorgeous. So, thanks very much for
listening and I'll stop it there.